[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Omega is a place for people
to deal with the experience
of life.
>> Come home to themselves.
>> Seekers of all kinds.
>> A spiritual community.
>> All paths.
>> A house with many rooms.
>> It's a ticket
into spirituality.
>> Spirit of holistic education.
>> Kindred spirit.
>> A sense of what it would be
like to really be themselves.
>> Retreats have
always been important.
>> Learning environment.
>> Omega is a great gift.
>> You always go
into the desert.
>> It's hundreds of
thousands of seekers.
>> Tool for unity.
>> You always retreat.
>> Refuge in the 21st century.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I work here at
Omega Institute,
and I'm 32 years old.
So I used to be kind
of a shy person.
I didn't have a
lot of self-value
and had been raised in
kind of a difficult family.
But in any case,
I ended up feeling
like I didn't have a lot
of self-value or self-worth
in my life.
So I was living my
life doing my thing
and having unhappy relationships
and jobs I didn't love,
stuff like that.
So anyway.
I was 29.
And I discovered that I had
a really swollen lymph node.
I was on vacation.
And I went to the doctor, and it
turned out to be throat cancer.
Like I said, I was
29 at the time,
and I'd been a
vegetarian for 10 years.
And I thought I was doing
all the right things
and feeling pretty healthy.
I think the first
thing that anybody
thinks when they hear cancer
is that you're going to die,
of course.
I mean, it turns out that
so many people survive
that it's not really
a death sentence,
but it feels that way.
And it just feels like, how
could this be happening to me?
I'm so young.
And actually, it was a rare
cancer for someone my age.
And so, yeah, I was stunned.
And then of course, I had
to tell my family, which
was the worst part of it all.
Yeah, nobody wants to
hear about your daughter
or your granddaughter
has cancer.
And so it was terrible.
I really had no idea how
difficult it was going to be.
And I'm glad I didn't
know in the beginning.
But I was diagnosed
with the cancer.
And the amazing thing is that
the people in my community
came to help me.
All of my friends
gathered in a way
that I just never knew
how much they cared
for me until this happened.
And they became like a
little army of helpers.
They organized support
groups for themselves.
They invited me to tell
them exactly what I needed
and when I needed it.
And regularly,
food, and company,
and rides to the doctor,
and everything else
started showing
up at my doorstep.
People I didn't even
know cared about me--
were showing up with presents
and things like that.
I had surgery.
And they removed many
of my lymph nodes
as well as part of my
tongue, and my tonsils,
and things like that.
And then I had
radiation for six weeks.
And the effects of the
radiation were that I
couldn't eat for three months.
And I really quickly
began to lose weight.
And I lost 70 pounds
in three months
and pretty much
became a skeleton
from being kind of a larger
woman, to being a skeleton.
I couldn't sit down.
Yeah, I just was all bones.
And I feel like
what happened for me
is I got to start
recreating myself from bones
up, emotionally and physically.
And it really changed who I am.
I feel like I'm a
totally different person.
I mean, I look different.
I sound different.
I act different.
Everything is different for me.
And I feel at this
point like it's
a gift that was given to me.
I mean, the first
thing is that I
started to learn
even while I was sick
that there was really no
reason not to take risky things
and do them.
I think because I
almost lost my life,
I suddenly realized
how precious it was.
And I feel like I lived
in this town for 13 years.
At the time I was diagnosed,
I was in a really--
not a very happy relationship.
I quit my job.
I ended the relationship.
I moved into my own place.
A year later, here I am at
Omega after the breaking up
with the relationship
and just getting healthy.
And I feel like the sky is
the limit at this point.
I mean, I've moved out
of my town of 13 years.
And I have no idea where
I'm going after this.
And it's really because of that.
Because I realized
through the experience
that the safety of society
wasn't really going to cut it.
I mean, I was sick.
I was pretty much dying.
And anything I'd
done up to that point
really wasn't that ecstatic.
And I feel like I'm
kind of on the path
to bliss at this point.
I mean, I'm a really
skeptical spiritual person.
I'm not into the fufu stuff.
But I really feel as though
I'm ready to explore it.
Yeah.
I remember at one
point when I hadn't
eaten for a really long time.
And I was so hungry and
so weak and realized
that was probably the hungriest
I would ever be in my life.
And I decided to just
experience it, instead of
crave pizza or anything.
And I feel like that was a
really profound moment for me.
I realized that I could
handle almost anything.
And I feel like I can.
I mean, it's funny.
My voice is a really
big indicator.
Whenever I'm feeling sad or
afraid, it disappears still.
And it's such a blessing.
It's just having like a
little meter to tell me
when I'm not really being true
to myself and that's good news.
That's good news.
And I feel like now
I really learned
to use my voice not
only for myself,
but to weave everybody's
conflicts out.
In the last couple years,
I've been told a lot of times
that I'm a really great
conflict resolver.
And I think it's
because I've finally
learned how to use my voice.
It was kind of a high voice.
And now I-- my uncle
calls it a whiskey voice.
But yeah, it's definitely
a lower, gruff voice.
And actually, that's
one of the few things
that I'm most upset
about around it
is that I miss my old singing
voice and just the ability
to speak loudly and all that.
But I guess it's kind of a small
price to pay at this point.
What I learned is
that because I had
went through basically dying and
being reborn, that as a result,
I can hold the space for
anyone going through anything.
In the last few
years, it just so
happened that a
lot of people going
through really difficult things
have wound up in my life.
And I feel like I've
midwifed them through it.
And I think it's
because of my experience
that I was able to do that.
I don't think I ever
would have believed
that I would have the ability to
care for people in those places
before this.
It's what fires me up now.
Yeah, it's my joy now.
I think then I was just so
ignorant of my own preciousness
in life, just that--
I mean, every part of me-- my
communication, my sexuality,
my friends--
I felt like I didn't
really care for myself.
And now, I feel so precious.
And every moment feels
that way to me now.
I cry so often not
because I'm sad,
but because I feel so blessed
to be living this life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello, my name has
two pronunciations.
One is Yzaye and
the other is Ysaye.
I'm named Ysaye
by my father, who
was a violinist, and who named
me after the violinist Eugene
Ysaye who was from Belgium.
My father gave me
that name because he
wanted me to be a violinist,
and he taught me for 17 years.
But really, that was
my father's dream.
I didn't know I was
supposed to be a musician,
so I tried many other
things in my life.
When I was 12 years old,
I met a girl from Haiti,
and she was deaf.
And in that same year, I went
to see a Broadway play called
"The Miracle Worker."
It was about Helen Keller,
who was both deaf and blind,
and her teacher who
taught her how to speak.
And she became a very, very
famous woman, very capable
of doing anything
that she wanted to do.
And I decided at
the age of 12 that I
wanted to be a miracle
worker, that I wanted
to teach deaf kids how to talk.
And I had a friend who
I could start with.
And we got to know each
other very, very well.
And when it was time
for me to go to college,
I decided not to major
in music, but to go
into speech pathology,
so I could learn how
to teach deaf kids how to talk.
Amazingly enough, I never
worked with a single deaf person
all through my training--
bachelor's, master's, and PhD
in speech pathology.
And then I decided
that I would go
to Gallaudet University
in Washington, DC
to study sign language
so that at least I
could begin to communicate
with people who were deaf
or who were part of
the deaf community.
And after that, I
studied interpreting
so that I could actually
be in situations where
I was the link between
the deaf and the hearing.
And one Sunday I was asked
to actually interpret
a church service that
had to do with people
with various
handicapping conditions.
And someone said, well,
could you also sing?
And I decided,
well, maybe I could,
that I could interpret the
service into sign language,
and that I could sing at some
point and sign for myself.
It happened that during
that church service,
Bernice Reagon, who was
the founder of Sweet
Honey in the Rock,
came to that service.
She had never come to a
service at that church before,
but she came to this service.
She heard me singing.
She saw me signing.
And afterwards she
came up to me and said,
I'm a member of Sweet
Honey in the Rock,
and we're looking
for a new member.
Would you like to join?
Or would you like to
come and audition?
And I thought, me?
[LAUGHTER]
(SINGING) I sing because
I'm happy and I sing.
At the time, I was teaching
in a dental school.
I was being a
speech pathologist.
I was doing health things.
And it never
occurred to me that I
could join a group
that was establishing
the kind of reputation
that it was,
that had a sense of mission
and purpose whose music--
Bernice's music, at least,
I had been listening to
for a very long time.
Because she was a member of the
SNCC Freedom Singers who I had
listened to through
college in the '60s.
But I agreed.
And I was very, very glad
that on this occasion,
I had said yes.
And that really,
I think, is kind
of the moral of the story is to
say yes when the time is right.
Because when I said
yes, I opened a door
that I had no idea
even existed--
a world of music
that I thought I
had turned my back
on at the age of 17
when I left to go to college.
And since joining Sweet
Honey in the Rock,
literally things have
happened that I could never
have planned.
I think one of the lessons
I've learned through my life
is that even though we may
have our own personal goals,
there seems to be a much
bigger plan at work,
and that sometimes by simply
saying yes to small steps,
we're actually saying yes
to a much bigger picture.
And so for the past--
I don't know how many years.
My math isn't good.
But since 1979,
I've been singing
with Sweet Honey in the
Rock, which has given me
an opportunity to travel
throughout the world, which
I wouldn't have done as
a university professor.
It has given me the opportunity
to begin to write music
and to have that music performed
by artists and by choirs
around the world, really.
It has given me the
opportunity to deepen
my knowledge of African and
African-American history
and culture in a way
that has been meaningful
for my own spiritual,
political health
and has helped me to begin
to do these workshops,
like the one that I'm doing
now at Omega Institute, where
people come to sing
and come to participate
in an experience of building
community through song
and through a
common understanding
of the history that has actually
brought these songs into being.
What I recognized ultimately
is that my personal goal
of wanting to give voice
to the deaf in some ways
has come to fruition,
through this enabling people
to sing and to
find their voices.
So that not literally am I
working with deaf people,
but I am very literally working
with people whose voices I
am helping to unfold.
My father and his
dream are not lost,
because everything
that I am doing now I
learned before I
was 17 years old.
(SINGING) I'm happy and
I sing because I'm free.
And in terms of the
music, the skills that I
have as a musician,
all of those things
I learned studying the violin,
studying music in high school.
And so nothing is lost.
In fact, everything matters.
Everything that I've
ever done in my life
has contributed to the moment
that I am in right now.
That essentially is my story.
>> I'm an actress and
a singer from New York.
And I haven't been
very successful at it.
And I was kind of
getting discouraged back
around 10 years ago or so.
I wasn't getting much work.
I was just getting extra
work here and there.
And it was getting kind
of hard to keep it up,
also living hand to mouth
doing temp work here and there.
And I hated being poor.
And then at the same time,
my mom became very ill.
She became an invalid.
And suddenly, that threw
my perspective way off.
The idea of standing in
front of a casting director,
pouring out my heart and
soul and having him say next,
suddenly didn't seem
so important to me
when my mother was lying
gravely ill in a hospital.
So I put performing on the
back burner for a while.
And I figured I would get
back to it eventually.
And I took a permanent
job in a law firm,
which is the furthest thing
from being a performer that
can possibly be.
But it earned me money.
And I thought, I'm going
to get back to it someday.
I'm going to get
back to it someday.
And years went by, and I
wasn't getting back to it.
And then 1998-- my
mother passed away.
And when you suffer a loss
like that and something's
missing from your
life, or something
was missing from
my life, I suddenly
realized what else was
missing from my life as well.
Not only did I not have my mom
anymore, but I started looking.
OK, Susan, come on.
Let's be honest.
What else is missing
from your life?
And I knew, of course,
it was performing.
But I knew that I
didn't want to do it
the same way I did it before.
I knew that I didn't
want to go back
to being the starving actress
and living hand to mouth.
So I didn't know what my
first step was going to be.
I had no idea.
And my wonderful
sister-in-law introduced me
to the Omega institute, and
she said this is what you need.
And so I came here and
I did a course called
Life Shaping, which was
basically trying to tell you,
OK, you can change your life.
You can shape your
life, but don't expect
to have all your bases covered.
Don't expect to know what
step two is going to be.
Just take step one and
trust that step two
is going to come along,
which was very scary to me.
Because I had always
tried to, oh, well, what
I'm going to do next.
Next week I have this temp job,
and next week I have this one.
I was always used to
covering my bases.
So it was kind of
scary to think, OK,
I'm going to trust this.
So I came home.
And the first step I
did was I got in touch
with a voice teacher who
I had met once before.
And so I started singing
different songs with her.
And I brought in a
Grossman song one day.
I remember Norma was
playing at her piano.
And all of a sudden,
she looked at me
and she said, oh, Susan, this
is the music you've got to sing.
This is it.
This is for you.
And we both, of course-- it
fit my voice like a glove.
I said this is the music that
I've heard mommy and daddy
play all their lives.
This is what I
really want to do.
(SINGING) Da, da, da, da, da,
da, ba, da da da, da, da, da.
So I started working
on jazz standards.
And I was building
up a repertoire
to the point of
doing my own set.
Even though I didn't know
how I was going to do it,
I knew that I wanted to
perform my own set someday.
So I kept on building
up a repertoire,
and I had 10, 12
songs underneath me.
And then through
my voice teacher,
I got in touch with
this organization
of musicians and performers.
And they also had
connections to certain clubs
around New York City.
So, yay, I could perform.
And I started performing
in singer showcases
with like 10 other singers.
And I would be--
I'd get to do my three
and four-song set,
and that was really cool.
But I said, now, I
want to do my own set
for a whole entire hour.
So I found the best damn
musicians I could for my money.
They're all wonderful people.
We got together and
it was phenomenal.
(SINGING) Da, da, da, da, da.
I kept on saying thank
you, thank you, thank you.
This is so great.
I threw my arms around my
accompanist, because I said,
I can't believe
how great this is,
how easy it was going to be.
And as much as I think
about my law firm job,
I had to fill every
one of those seats,
because I had the
7:00 to 8:00 slot.
And albeit they might
aggravate the bejesus out of me
during the day,
bless their hearts.
Every seat in the place was
taken by family and friends,
but also by all those wonderful
people who work at my law firm.
And they cheered me on.
And, well, I could
have done two hours.
I did an hour--
a little more than an hour.
But since I got this
from the universe,
since I was able to manifest
this hour-long thing,
I'm putting it out there.
Now, I want to be paid for
it, instead of me paying out.
So that's my story.
[LAUGHTER]
[MUSIC PLAYING]